feat: extend function documentation (#2408)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/dev_docs/contracts/syntax/functions.md

title: Functions
---

## Visibility

In Aztec there are multiple different types of visibility that can be applied to functions. Namely we have `data visibility` and `function visibility`. 

### Data Visibility

> Data visibility is used to describe whether the data (or state) used in a function is generally accessible (public) or on a need to know basis (private). Functions with public data visibility is executed by the sequencer, and functions with private data visibility are executed by the user. For more information on why this is the case, see [communication](../../../concepts/foundation/communication/public_private_calls.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data visibility is used to describe whether the data (or state) used in a function is generally accessible (public) or on a need to know basis (private). Functions with public data visibility are executed by the sequencer, and functions with private data visibility are executed by the user. For more information on why this is the case, see [communication](../../../concepts/foundation/communication/public_private_calls.md).
```

In the following sections, we are going to see how these two "types" co-exists and interact.

### Function visibility

> This is the kind of visibility you are more used to seeing in Solidity and more "normal" programming languages. It is used to describe whether a function is callable from other contracts, or only from within the same contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the kind of visibility you are more used to seeing in Solidity and more "traditional" programming languages. It is used to describe whether a function is callable from other contracts, or only from within the same contract.
```

By default, all functions are callable from other contracts, similarly to the Solidity `public` visibility. To make them only callable from the contract itself, you can mark them as `internal`. Contrary to solidity, we don't have the `external` nor `private` keywords. `external` as it is implided, and `private` since we don't support inheritance and would also be confusing with multiple types of `private`.

> A good place to use `internal` is when you want a private function to be able to alter public state. While as mentioned above, private functions cannot do this directly, they are able to call public functions, and by making these internal, we can ensure that this state manipulating function is only callable from our private function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good place to use `internal` is when you want a private function to be able to alter public state. As mentioned above, private functions cannot do this directly. They are able to call public functions and by making these internal we can ensure that this state manipulating function is only callable from our private function.
```

- A constructor doesn't have a name, because its purpose is clear: to initialise contract state.
- In Aztec terminology, a constructor is always a '`private` function' (i.e. it cannot be a `public` function, in the current version of the sandbox it cannot call public functions either).
- A constructor behaves almost identically to any other function. It's just important for Aztec to be able to identify this function as special: it may only be called once, and will not be deployed as part of the contract.

An example of a somewhat boring constructor is as follows:

#include_code empty-constructor /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/public_token_contract/src/main.nr rust

Although you can have a constructor that does nothing, you might want to do something with it, such as setting the deployer as an owner.

#include_code constructor /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/escrow_contract/src/main.nr rust

:::danger
It is not possible to call public functions from within a constructor. Beware that the compiler will not throw an error if you do, but the execution will fail!
:::

## `Public` Functions

> A public function is executed by the sequencer and access a state model that is very similar to that of the EVM and Ethereum. Even though mainly working in an EVM-like model for public transactions, they are able to write data into private storage that can be consumed later by a private function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A public function is executed by the sequencer and has access to a state model that is very similar to that of the EVM and Ethereum. Even though they work in an EVM-like model for public transactions, they are able to write data into private storage that can be consumed later by a private function.
```

To create a public function you can annotate it with the `#[aztec(public)]` attribute. This will make the [public context](./context.mdx#public-context) available within your current function's execution scope.

#include_code add_minter /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

## `Private` Functions

As alluded to earlier, a private function operates on private information, and is executed by the user. To tell the compiler that this is the kind of function we are creating annotate it with the `#[aztec(private)]` attribute. This will make the [private context](./context.mdx#private-context-broken-down) available within your current function's execution scope.

#include_code redeem_shield /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

## `unconstrained` functions

> Unconstrained functions are are an underlying part of `Noir` and has a deeper explanation [here](https://noir-lang.org/language_concepts/unconstrained). But in short, they are functions which are not directly constrained and therefore should be seem as untrusted! That they are untrusted means that for security the developer must make sure to constrain them when used! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unconstrained functions are are an underlying part of Noir and has a deeper explanation [here](https://noir-lang.org/language_concepts/unconstrained). But in short, they are functions which are not directly constrained and therefore should be seen as untrusted! That they are untrusted means that, for security, the developer must make sure to constrain them when used! 
```

> Unconstrained functions are are an underlying part of Noir and has a deeper explanation [here](https://noir-lang.org/language_concepts/unconstrained). But in short, they are functions which are not directly constrained and therefore should be seen as untrusted! That they are untrusted means that, for security, the developer must make sure to constrain them when used! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unconstrained functions are an underlying part of Noir - a deeper explanation can be found [here](https://noir-lang.org/language_concepts/unconstrained). But in short, they are functions which are not directly constrained and therefore should be seen as untrusted! That they are untrusted means that, for security, the developer must make sure to constrain them when used! 
```

> Beyond using them inside your other functions, they can however be very convenient for providing something that reads storage and apply some logic and returns values to a user interface or similar. Below is a snippet from exposing the `balance_of_private` function from a token implementation, allow a user to easily read their balance. Similar to the `balanceOf` function in the ERC20 standard. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond using them inside your other functions, they are convenient for providing an interface that reads storage, applies  logic and returns values to a UI or test. Below is a snippet from exposing the `balance_of_private` function from a token implementation, which allows a user to easily read their balance, similar to the `balanceOf` function in the ERC20 standard. 
```

> Beyond using them inside your other functions, they are convenient for providing an interface that reads storage, applies  logic and returns values to a UI or test. Below is a snippet from exposing the `balance_of_private` function from a token implementation, which allows a user to easily read their balance, similar to the `balanceOf` function in the ERC20 standard. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beyond using them inside your other functions, they are convenient for providing an interface that reads storage, applies logic and returns values to a UI or test. Below is a snippet from exposing the `balance_of_private` function from a token implementation, which allows a user to easily read their balance, similar to the `balanceOf` function in the ERC20 standard. 
```

#include_code balance_of_private /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

:::info

> Note, that unconstrained functions can have access to both public and private data when executed on users device. This is possible since it is not actually part of the circuits that is executed in contract execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note, that unconstrained functions can have access to both public and private data when executed on the user's device. This is possible since it is not actually part of the circuits that are executed in contract execution.
```

If we are instead fetching the notes using an oracle call, we can keep the function signature independent of the underlying notes and thus make it much easier to integrate with! A similar idea, but applied to the authentication mechanism is used for the Authentication Witnesses that allow us to have a single function signature for any wallet implementation making integrations a breeze, see [AuthWit](../../wallets/main#authorizing-actions) for more information on this.

Oracles introduce **non-determinism** into a circuit, and thus are `unconstrained`. It is important that any information that is injected into a circuit through an oracle is later constrained for correctness. Otherwise, the circuit will be **under-constrained** and potentially insecure!

`Aztec.nr` has a module dedicated to its oracles. If you are interested, you can view them by following the link below:

> #include_code oracles-module /yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle.nr rust

Reviewer: Do you want to include the list here instead of just the top of the file?

Author: The top of the file is essentially just used as a link here, showing the rest the file don't bring much extra data so it is essentially just a reference.

### A few useful inbuilt oracles

> - [`compute_selector`](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle/compute_selector.nr) - Computes the selector of a function. This is useful for when you want to call a function from within a circuit, but don't got an interface at hand and don't want to hardcode the selector in hex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`compute_selector`](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle/compute_selector.nr) - Computes the selector of a function. This is useful for when you want to call a function from within a circuit, but don't have an interface at hand and don't want to hardcode the selector in hex.
```

### Private -> Private

In Aztec Private to Private function calls are handled by the [private kernel circuit](../../../concepts/advanced/circuits/kernels/private_kernel.md), and take place on the user's device.
Behind the scenes, the `Aztec RPC Server` (the beating heart of Aztec that runs in your wallet) will execute all of the functions in the desired order "simulating" them in sequence. For example, a very common use-case of Private to Private interaction is calling another private function from an `account contract` (Account contracts are a general concept, more information about them can be found [here](../../wallets/writing_an_account_contract.md)).

Take, for example, the following call stack:
```
AccountContract::entrypoint
    |-> Foo::example_call
        | -> Bar::nested_call
    |-> Baz::example_call
```

In the example above the Account Contract has been instructed to call two external functions. In the first function all, to `Foo::example_call` a further nested call is performed to `Bar::nested_call`. Finally the account contract makes one last call to `Baz::example_call`.

Lets further illustrate what these examples could look like

> <!-- TODO: should these move into the docs examples -->

Reviewer: Is this to be done before merging this PR?

Author: No. The example is just to show the ordering, can stand as is.

```rust
// Foo contains a singular function that returns the result of Bar::nested_call
contract Foo {
    #[aztec(private)]
    fn example_call(input: Field) -> pub Field {
        Bar::at(<bar_address>).nested_call(input)
    }
}

// Bar contains a singular function that returns a `input + 1`
contract Bar {
    #[aztec(private)]
    fn nested_call(input: Field) -> pub Field {
        input + 1
    }
}

// Baz contains a singular function that simply returns `10`
contract Baz {
    #[aztec(private)]
    fn example_call() -> pub Field {
        10
    }
}
```

> When simulating the following call stack, we can execution flow to continue procedurally. The simulator will begin at the account contract's entry point, find a call to `Foo::example_call`, then begin to execute the code there. When the simulator executes the code in contract `Foo`, it will find the further nested call to contract `Bar::nested_call`. It will execute the code in Bar, bringing the return value back to contract `Foo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When simulating the following call stack, we can expect execution flow to continue procedurally. The simulator will begin at the account contract's entry point, find a call to `Foo::example_call`, then begin to execute the code there. When the simulator executes the code in contract `Foo`, it will find the further nested call to contract `Bar::nested_call`. It will execute the code in `Bar`, bringing the return value back to contract `Foo`.
```

The orchestration of these calls has an added benefit. All of the nested calls are **recursively proven**. This means that the kernel circuit essentially gobbles up each of our function's execution proofs. Condensing the size of the final proof to just be one.

<!-- TODO(md): include a diagram displaying how the mental model of a kernel interaction works -->

With this intuition in place, lets see how we actually perform the call. To make things easier, we can make a small struct that wraps the calls to something as seen in the `token_interface`s burn function below. This struct is just providing us a clean way to call function, but we could also just call the function directly as it is done in this function. 

:::info

> Note that the function selector is computed using one of the oracles from earlier, and that the first `Field` is wrapped in parenthesis. It is wrapped hence it is a struct and those are outlined in tuple-form for selector computation, `AztecAddress` becomes `(Field)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the function selector is computed using one of the oracles from earlier, and that the first `Field` is wrapped in parenthesis. Structs are outlined in tuple-form for selector computation, so they are wrapped in parenthesis--`AztecAddress` becomes `(Field)`.
```

:::

#include_code private_burn_interface /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_bridge_contract/src/token_interface.nr rust

Using this interface, we can then call it as seen below. All the way down at the bottom we can see that we are calling the `burn` function from the `token_interface` struct.

> The snippets is a token bridge that is burning the underlying token and creating a message for L1 to mint some assets to the `recipient` on Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following snippet is from a token bridge that is burning the underlying token and creating a message for L1 to mint some assets to the `recipient` on Ethereum.
```

title: Functions
---

## Visibility

In Aztec there are multiple different types of visibility that can be applied to functions. Namely we have `data visibility` and `function visibility`. 

### Data Visibility
Data visibility is used to describe whether the data (or state) used in a function is generally accessible (public) or on a need to know basis (private). Functions with public data visibility is executed by the sequencer, and functions with private data visibility are executed by the user. For more information on why this is the case, see [communication](../../../concepts/foundation/communication/public_private_calls.md).

> In the coming sections, we are going to see how these two "types" co-exists and interact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following sections, we are going to see how these two "types" co-exists and interact.
```

nit ^

### Function visibility
This is the kind of visibility you are more used to seeing in Solidity and more "normal" programming languages. It is used to describe whether a function is callable from other contracts, or only from within the same contract.

By default, all functions are callable from other contracts, similarly to the Solidity `public` visibility. To make them only callable from the contract itself, you can mark them as `internal`.

A good place to use `internal` is when you want a private function to be able to alter public state. While as mentioned above, private functions cannot do this directly, they are able to call public functions, and by making these internal, we can ensure that this state manipulating function is only callable from our private function.

:::danger
Note that non-internal functions could be used directly as an entry-point, which currently means that the `msg_sender` would be `0`, so for now, using address `0` as a burn address is not recommended.

> :::

Reviewer 2: should we add a note on how, unlike solidity, we don't have an `external` keyword

Reviewer: I see this is included above.

## `constructor`

- A special `constructor` function MUST be declared within a contract's scope.
- A constructor doesn't have a name, because its purpose is clear: to initialise contract state.
- In Aztec terminology, a constructor is always a '`private` function' (i.e. it cannot be a `public` function, in the current version of the sandbox it cannot call public functions either).
- A constructor behaves almost identically to any other function. It's just important for Aztec to be able to identify this function as special: it may only be called once, and will not be deployed as part of the contract.

An example of a somewhat boring constructor is as follows:

#include_code empty-constructor /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/public_token_contract/src/main.nr rust

Although you can have a constructor that does nothing, you might want to do something with it, such as setting the deployer as an owner.

#include_code constructor /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/escrow_contract/src/main.nr rust

:::danger

> It is not possible to call public functions from within a constructor. Beware that the compiler will not throw an error if you do, but the execution will fail!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not possible, at this time, to call public functions from within a constructor. Beware that the compiler will not throw an error if you do, but the execution will fail!
```
1. add a note on why
2. say that this is just temporary and working on a fix?

Author: It is already mentioned in the small list under the constructor, I just created the danger box for extra eye catching.

Author: Or, the why is not mentioned in there. But where thinking showing that into the limitations page to not bloat in here?

Reviewer: To not be redundant here, I suggest adding it to the Limitations page and adding a link here.

## `unconstrained` functions

Unconstrained functions are are an underlying part of `Noir` and has a deeper explanation [here](https://noir-lang.org/language_concepts/unconstrained). But in short, they are functions which are not directly constrained and therefore should be seem as untrusted! That they are untrusted means that for security the developer must make sure to constrain them when used! 

Beyond using them inside your other functions, they can however be very convenient for providing something that reads storage and apply some logic and returns values to a user interface or similar. Below is a snippet from exposing the `balance_of_private` function from a token implementation, allow a user to easily read their balance. Similar to the `balanceOf` function in the ERC20 standard. 

#include_code balance_of_private /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

:::info
Note, that unconstrained functions can have access to both public and private data when executed on users device. This is possible since it is not actually part of the circuits that is executed in contract execution.
:::

## Oracle functions

> An oracle is something that allow us to get data from the outside world into our contracts. The most widely-known types of oracles in blockchain systems are probably Chainlink price feeds, which allow us to get the price of an asset in USD taking non-blockchain data into account. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An oracle is something that allows us to get data from the outside world into our contracts. The most widely-known types of oracles in blockchain systems are probably Chainlink price feeds, which allow us to get the price of an asset in USD taking non-blockchain data into account. 
```

> While this is one type of oracle, the more general oracle, allows us to get "some" data into the contract. In the context of oracle functions or oracle calls in Aztec, it can essentially be seen as user provided arguments, that can be embedded at any point in the circuit, and thus don't need to be an input parameter. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this is one type of oracle, the more general oracle, allows us to get "some" data into the contract. In the context of oracle functions or oracle calls in Aztec, it can essentially be seen as user-provided arguments, that can be embedded at any point in the circuit, and thus don't need to be an input parameter. 
```

**Why is this useful? Why don't just pass them as input parameters?**
In the world of EVM, you would just read the values directly from storage and call it a day. However, when we are working with circuits for private execution, this becomes more tricky as you cannot just read the storage directly from your state tree, only commitments sit in there 😱. The pre-images (content) of your notes need to be provided to the function to prove that you actually allowed to spend them. 

> You could of course provide them to your function as inputs, but then functions that have different underlying notes would end up with different function signatures and thus selectors. Meaning that integrating with many of this would become a pain in the neck for the developers, see some of the motivation behind [EIP-4626](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4626) for similar case in EVM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You could of course provide them to your function as inputs, but then functions that have different underlying notes would end up with different function signatures and thus selectors. This means that integrating with many of notes would become a pain for the developers, see some of the motivation behind [EIP-4626](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4626) for similar case in EVM.
```

Reviewer 2: "Meaning that integrating with many of this" -> clarity the "this"

> If we are instead fetching the notes using an oracle call, we can keep the function signature independent of the underlying notes and thus make it much easier to integrate with! A similar idea, but applied to authentication mechanism is used for the Authentication Witnesses that allow us to have a single function signature for any wallet implementation making integrations a breeze, see [AuthWit](../../wallets/main#authorizing-actions) for more information on this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we are instead fetching the notes using an oracle call, we can keep the function signature independent of the underlying notes and thus make it much easier to integrate with! A similar idea, but applied to the authentication mechanism is used for the Authentication Witnesses that allow us to have a single function signature for any wallet implementation making integrations a breeze, see [AuthWit](../../wallets/main#authorizing-actions) for more information on this.
```

> Oracles introduce `non determinism` into a circuit, and thus are `unconstrained`. It is important that any information that is injected into a circuit through an oracle is later constrained for correctness. Otherwise the circuit will be `under constrained` and potentially insecure!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Oracles introduce **non-determinism** into a circuit, and thus are `unconstrained`. It is important that any information that is injected into a circuit through an oracle is later constrained for correctness. Otherwise, the circuit will be **under-constrained** and potentially insecure!
```

Reviewer 2: maybe use italics/bold instead?

- [`debug_log`](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle/debug_log.nr) - Provides a couple of debug functions that can be used to log information to the console. 
- [`auth_witness`](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle/auth_witness.nr) - Provides a way to fetch the authentication witness for a given address. This is useful when building account contracts to support approve-like functionality.
- [`get_l1_to_l2_message`](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle/get_l1_to_l2_message.nr) - Useful for application that receive messages from L1 to be consumed on L2, such as token bridges or other cross-chain applications.
- [`notes`](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec-nr/aztec/src/oracle/notes.nr) - Provides a lot of functions related to notes, such as fetches notes from storage etc, used behind the scenes for value notes and other pre-build note implementations.

---

> ## Calling functions from other functions

Reviewer 2: this is great but I wonder if these should be in `communication` instead? or maybe we can delete that? Since I saw a couple other places that talk about public <> private comms

Author: Think that is because it is in communication for foundations. Like the concepts themselves, but not how you do any of it in code. There it sits in communication together with l1 l2 stuff

Reviewer 2: maybe in communication we should link to here then?

### Private -> Private

In Aztec Private to Private function calls are handled by the [private kernel circuit](../../../concepts/advanced/circuits/kernels/private_kernel.md), and take place on the user's device.
Behind the scenes, the `Aztec RPC Server` (the beating heart of Aztec that runs in your wallet) will execute all of the functions in the desired order "simulating" them in sequence. For example, a very common use-case of Private to Private interaction is calling another private function from an `account contract` (Account contracts are a general concept, more information about them can be found [here](../../wallets/writing_an_account_contract.md)).

Take, for example, the following call stack:
```
AccountContract::entrypoint
    |-> A::example_call
        | -> B::nested_call
    |-> C::example_call
```

> <!-- TODO(md): better names for these examples-->

Reviewer 2: consider `foo` `bar` `baz`?

When the sequencer receives the messages, it will take over and execute the public parts of the transaction.

As a consequence a private function *CANNOT* accept a return value from a public function. It can only dispatch it.

The code required to dispatch a public function call from a private function is actually quite similar to private to private calls. As an example, we will look at the token contract, where users can unshield assets from private to public domain, essentially a transfer from a private account to a public one (often used for depositing privately into DeFi etc).

#include_code unshield /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust
#include_code increase_public_balance /yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

As we can see above, the private to public transaction flow looks very similar to the others in snippets, with the practicality being a bit different behind the scenes.

<!-- TODO: drawing illustrating how the proof is handed off -->

### Public -> Private 

> Wait, I thought you said we could not do this? Well, you are right, we cannot do this directly. However, we can do this indirectly if we are a little cheeky.

Reviewer 2: such a tease
